# Brain FWI

> [!NOTE]
> Title: Full-waveform inversion imaging of the human brain
>
> Authors: Guasch et al.

## Summary

- Ultrasound imaging is portable and safe, and FWI allows for accurate 3D imaging to a sub-millimetre resolution.
- Adaptive Waveform Inversion is able to create a model that compensates for wavefront distortion.
- This is one of the fundamental papers the IRP rests on.

## Background

### Traditional ultrasound

Conventional ultrasound cannot image the adult human brain at high resolution within the skull. This is for a few reasons:

1. High frequencies are required to obtain a high spatial resolution, but scattering and anelastic losses increase with frequency. At ultrasound frequencies (>20 khz, typically 1MHz - 20 MHz), these signal losses prevent succesful imaging of intra-cranial soft tissue.
2. The acoustic impedance between the skull and soft tissues an the skull and air-and-fluid-filled cavities produces significant refraction, diffraction, and reverberation which distort the source pulse significantly. This leads to strong abberations in phase and amplitude and significant spatial and directional variation in the waveform which cannot be robustly corrected for.
3. The skull generates strong reflections and multiple scattering, and these high amplitude signals interfere with and obscure the much weaker reflections produced by the small impedance contrasts that occur within soft tissue, leading to low signal and high source-generated noise.
4. Tomography is based on the infinite frequency approximation, which provides insufficient resolution.

### FWI

- FWI can recover sub-Fresnel zone property variations in tissue. 
    - Recall the Fresnel zone is the spatial region that meaningfully contributes to a wavefield measurement at a given receiver. This is $r \approx \sqrt{\lambda d / 2}$ for a wavelengt $\lambda$ at a distance $d$. Basically, it can resolve changes at a spatial scale smaller than $r$. Actually, it can resolve to a level that approaches the diffraction limit, $\lambda / 2$, especially in the 0.5 - 5MHz range.
- AWI is a modification of FWI that is better able to start from a poor starting model. Here, it is used as a preconditioner so the inversion can begin succesfully without any prior information about the skull. 

#### Acquisition

- Low-frequency ultrasound are recorded at all available azimuths by surrounding the head with transducers
- It takes ~2s to collect data across all 1024 transducers with each firing in turn.
- For the numerical experiment, the dominant wavelength was ~3.75mm, and the shortest was ~1.75mm. The minimum diameter of the Fresnel zone was >20mm. 
- The typical resolution for pulse-echo B-mode sonography is on the order of the insonifying dominant wavelength. For wave equation based methods like FWI, the achievable resolution is on the order of half the wavelength of the highest frequency, which was ~0.88mm.

#### Modelling considerations

- A homogeneous model is adequate for the soft tissue of the brain. However, for the bones of the skull, more care is required.
- AWI is capable of building an accurate model of the skull from the ultrasound data without a priori knowledge, and FWI can succeed with this as a starting model.
- Transverse: top down slice. Sagittal: side on slice. Coronal: straight on slice.
- Sub mm resolution has been achieved using frequencies below 1MHz, verified by the resolution of parts of the venous sinuses with a thickness of 0.8mm.
- Illumination is lost close to the base of the skull.

#### Recovering the brain with no a priori knowledge of the skull

- FWI requires a starting model within the basin on attraction of the global solution. Specifically, FWI will not converge to the correct global solution if the data generated by the starting model is shifted in time by more than half a wave cycle from the true data. 
- While FWI can recover soft tissue structure well (e.g., in breast imaging), the significant difference in the velocity range of soft tissues (1400$ms^{-1}$ (fat) - 1600$ms^{-1}$ (muscle/ cartillage)) versus cancellous bone (2100$ms^{-1}$), cortical bone $2800$ms^{-1}$, and vertebrae (~3500$ms^{-1}$) means recovery of a full model of the head requires a more complex methodology.
- AWI is less sensitive to the initial model, and is suitable for building an accurate model of the skull from an initial homogeneous, cycle skipped model that is no longer cycle skipped. This is the starting model for FWI.
- Note that solving for a series of 2D slices that are later interpolated is significantly cheaper, but accounting for 3D scattering, refraction, and reflection is nececsary. A 2D inversion of a 2D model is as accurate as a 3D inversion of a 3D model, but a 2D inversion of a 3D model fails entirely.

## FWI iteration

They inverted the in silico data in the time domain over eight finite-frequency bands starting from a dominant frequency of ~100KHz to the maximum stable frequency in the data of ~850kHz. Using multiple frequncies helped to ensure the inversion does not get trapped in some local solution.

During AWI, the inversion begins from a homogeneous water model using a single frequency band centred on 100kHz. Following AWI, the model was smoothed and FWI began from 320kHz before moving succesively to the maximum frequency.

FWI solves a non-linear least squares local optimisation problem by modifying the model to minimise the misfit $f$ defined as half the sum of the squares of the residual. Thus we minimise

$$f = \frac 1 2 (\mathbf{p} - \mathbf{d})^T(\mathbf{p} - \mathbf{d}),$$

where $\mathbf{p}$ and $\mathbf{d}$ are the predicted and observed data. 

The computational cost of solving the wave equation in 3D limits solution methods to iterated local gradient descent methods. The hypersurface defined by $f$ has at least as many dimensions as there are model parameters $m_i$.

The gradient of the functional w.r.t the model parameters is computed using the adjoint method,

$$\frac{\partial f}{\partial m_i} = \left[\frac {\partial \mathbf{p}} {\partial m_i} \right]^T(\mathbf{p - d}.$$

To compute the first derivative of the predicted data w.r.t the model parameters, the wave equation is written as a vector operation on the wavefield:

$$\mathbf{Au = s},$$

where $\bf s$ is a source term. Since $\mathbf{A}$ and $\mathbf{u}$ depend on the model parameters, but $\bf s$ does not, we can write

$$\mathbf{A} \frac {\partial \mathbf{u} } {\partial m_i} +  \frac {\partial \mathbf{A} } {\partial m_i}\mathbf{u} = 0. $$

Assuming $\bf A$ is invertible (which it must be if the linear eq. has a unique solution), we can write

$$\frac {\partial \mathbf{u} } {\partial m_i} = -\mathbf{A}^{-1} \frac {\partial \mathbf{A} } {\partial m_i}\mathbf{u} \mathbf{u},$$

as the variation of the wavefield w.r.t. the model parameters.

Now, the predicted data are a subset of the full wavefield extracted using a restriction matrix $\bf R$ such that $\bf p = Ru$, leading to

$$\frac {\partial \mathbf{p} } {\partial m_i} = -R\mathbf{A}^{-1} \frac {\partial \mathbf{A} } {\partial m_i}\mathbf{u} \mathbf{u}.$$

Since $\bf R$ does not depend on the model parameters either, this becomes

$$\frac{\partial f}{\partial m_i} = -\mathbf{u}^T\frac{\partial A^T}{\partial m_i}\mathbf{A}^{-T} \mathbf{R}^T(\mathbf{p - d}).$$

From left to right, the above reads:

1. Compute the residual by solving the wave equatioon to generate $\mathbf{p}$ in teh starting model
2. Inject the residual at receiver locations
3. Solve the wave equation backward in time
4. Scale the resulting wavefield using the differential of the wave equation operator $\bf A$ w.r.t. $m_i$
5. Find the zero lag of the cross-correlation of this wavefield in time with the original forward wavefield $\bf u$ at every point in the model

The result is a gradient vector oriented in the direction of maximum increase of $f$. Taking the negative gives the downhill direction.

### AWI

AWI is similar to FWI, but seeks to drive the ratio between the predicted and observed datasets to zero. Under ideal circumstances, both will reach the same endpoint. However, they will take different paths when implemented using local gradient descent methods, and AWI will be more resistive to getting trapped in local minima. 

The ratio is not generated sample by sample, but instead frequency-by-frequency after temporal FFT for each source-receiver pair. Division in the frequency domain corresponds to deconvolution in the time domain, so AWI effectively deconvolves one data set by the other and then attempts to drive the result toward a unit-amplitude delta function at zero temporal lag.
